The sports generic strategies are an excellent tool and that is why we have put so much focus on it,
because it helps us to understand how the different competitive advantage sources or strategies that a company has are.
However, if we take it in a very strict way, there may be companies that we do not know where to frame them.
Let's see why.
Let's review what is the cost management strategy.
If you opt for cost management, what you have to do is reduce costs throughout your value chain.
And your clients will choose you by price. Here we have the example of Ryanair.
Ryanair's clients choose Ryanair by price.
And also, your clients will be very unfaithful.
It is almost impossible that with a pure strategy of cost management you have faithful clients.
If we go to the differentiation strategy, it is the opposite.
Your clients, as in the case of OEB, choose you because there is something about your proposal that they like.
And you usually get some fidelity or loyalty with the clients.
But now I'm going to put the case of several companies, such as IKEA, for example, or Zara, or Mercadona, or Toyota.
And we will reason if they fit more within the strategy of cost management or differentiation.
Because it is complex. Mercadona, for example, is a company that is clearly a leader in cost management,
but nevertheless there are hundreds of thousands of clients that are absolutely loyal to Mercadona.
They do not choose Mercadona for cost alone.
Therefore, it is already complicating us. We do not know where to place it.
And the same would be said with IKEA, with Zara, with Toyota.
For this reason, a new strategy has been born called Best Cost Strategy, which is the strategy of the best cost.
And we are going to analyze it with the case of IKEA.
IKEA is the clear leader in cost of its industry.
It was just like it grew.
It won a huge market share thanks to having costs much lower than the rest of its competitors,
to its huge scale economy, and being able to impact those costs savings in the prices of the final product.
And there are many proofs. It is very efficient in terms of all logistics, warehouses, etc.
And another example of its commitment to cost management is the fact that you have to assemble the furniture.
That they are not assembled.
It has reduced the level of service with the aim of reducing costs.
However, I believe that IKEA, from that huge scale economy and making certain innovations in its value proposition,
has managed to incorporate certain factors or certain particularities that fit more into a differentiation strategy.
If we think about it, if we follow the criterion of whether customers choose IKEA only for cheap,
or there are customers who also choose it for some differential factor that they like about IKEA,
I think the answer is yes.
There are many customers of IKEA who do not buy IKEA only for cheap, but because it provides them with things they like.
And I'm going to give you an example.
The return policy of IKEA does not correspond to a low-cost company.
Because it does not contribute to saving.
Having a policy like that, that you can return the product, is extreme.
In 365 days, even if you have used it, you can change it for another.
If your policy is strictly low-cost, you do not allow yourself to do these things.
Because it obviously does not contribute.
On the contrary, if your main goal is to reduce costs, you would have deduction policies that would have to be legal.
Or be strictly within the legal limit.
For example, IKEA catalogs provide value to IKEA customers.
Because they can, in their homes, take ideas, etc.
Choose the furniture they are going to buy before going to the point of sale.
This is clear that it does not correspond to a low-cost policy.
Because IKEA spends a lot of money distributing millions of catalogs around the world.
In addition, IKEA contributes to other differential values.
For example, design.
I think this is the result of the huge scale economy.
Because despite being the leader in cost, with that size you have, you can hire designers, etc.
You can invest in the design of the product.
But investing in design does not correspond to a low-cost strategy.
A company that competes strictly in low-cost would have to invest as little as possible.
Another factor that contributes to people buying IKEA, not only for the price, is the huge range or variety of range.
This means a lot of comfort for customers.
A customer can furnish an entire apartment in IKEA.
Not only furnish it, but buy everything he needs for a home.
This is clear that it is an additional value that IKEA is able to contribute.
And that makes its customers not buy it just for the price and are also loyal.
Therefore, IKEA responds, as well as Toyota, Mercadona or Zara, which we will analyze in detail.
They respond to a generic strategy that does not correspond to the leader in cost, differentiation or niche.
But it could be considered Best Cost Strategy.
They have relatively low prices and costs compared to the rest of the industry.
However, they are able to provide differential values that make their customers loyal.